From Hansel minutes.com. It's
Hansel minutes, a weekly discussion
with web developer and technologists.
Scott Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number 51 recorded Tuesday, February
13, 2007. Support for Hanselman
it's as provided by Tellerik
rad controls, the most comprehensive
suite of components for windows
forms and asp.net web applications
online@wwwdottlerik.com. Support is also provided
by.net developers journal. The world's
leading.net developer magazine online at
www dot  dot com.
In this episode, Scott and
Carl discussed code metrics and
the benefits of static analysis
tool. This is Carl Franklin. You're
listening to Hansel minutes from
Hanselman it's dot com. Of
course, this is all about
Scott and what he's thinking
about lately. So, Scott, what
are you thinking about lately?
Right now? I am deep
into Stanek analysis. You know,
we, we always like to
take things like a continuous
integration to the next, the
next level. And I'm writing
up some, some code guidelines,
some software guidelines at the
company that I work at
here at Kirlian, trying to
basically define, you know, minimal,
continuous integration, average and maximum,
like, you know, minimal integration
would be napped and unit
and you know, the bill
runs automatically. It can a
more optimal you'd run things
like FX cop and things
like that. And then maximally,
I want to, I want
to get as much static
analysis of the code as
possible in a, in an
automated fashion, but then I'm
also as a, as, as
chief architect, I get overwhelmed.
Sometimes I feel like it's
my job to read all
of the code and the
entire company. Really? Yeah. I
just, I'm starting to realize
that that doesn't scale, right.
Scott doesn't scale seems obvious,
but Scott clone. Yeah, exactly.
I need a deep copy.
It doesn't, it doesn't work
though. So, I mean, we're
a big company with lots
of products. And I think
that a lot of people
who are maybe in my
position have a lead engineer
type position, they want to
read everything and read everything,
everyone commits, but that kind
of lead programmer model doesn't
always work. And also just
reading the code may give
me a familiarity with what's
going on, but it doesn't
really give me big picture
understanding of that. You know,
how the suite fits together.
When you say static analysis,
what kind of analysis? Well,
I want to take it
beyond the kind of analysis
you get out of the
box with say a reflector.
I want to look at,
at the, at the code
without looking at the lines
of code. I want to
know about, you know, you
know, we've talked A little
bit about psychosomatic, conceptual amount
of complexity, right? Exactly. But
I also want to talk
about kind of coupling, you
know, our, our is a
class, you know, too fine
grained is it got too
much going on. Let me
put it this way. Namespaces
are a very logical organizational
unit, right? While assemblies are
a physical unit. And there's
a lot of confusion where
sometimes you'll get into situations
where someone will have one
assembly equals one namespace, they'll
forget that they can spread
namespaces across multiple assemblies and
that they can have multiple
assemblies have multiple namespaces. So
are you saying you found
some tools that actually look
at your code a little
more than FX cop does
and, and will actually tell
you, Hey, you didn't write
this correctly. Yeah. In, in
a, to an extent they
won't come out and say,
Hey, this code sucks and
tell you the line. But
you know, you brought up
FX cop FX cop is
this great kind of wizard
with a bunch of pre-configured
rules that it runs via
reflection on your code. And
it says things like, you
know, don't misspell this and
make sure you've got, make
sure that you're calm, compliant
if you're doing calm, stuff
like that. But this tool
that I've been playing with
lately, and I would say
more than just playing with
it and getting pretty deep
into it is called N
depend. It's like, I think
of it as like the
end class of tools and
unit and cover and depend
and in know full disclosure
and depend is not a
sponsor of the show. You
know, I've never met the
guy You're just temporarily obsessed
with this tool obsessed. So
no one has asked me
to talk obsessive about this.
This is something I'm doing
on my own. So I
just want to make sure
people know that while, you
know, just like code rush,
right. COVID has never paid
me a dollar, but I
still spread the word about
code Cobra, rush obsessively. Right?
There's like homeless people on
the bus who knows Code
rush. Can I trust you,
Scott? Okay. So independ, it
was out for a while
kind of as a free
tool awhile back. And what
I think went wrong with
it was, it was just
too intense for the average,
Joe, it's nothing wrong with
being the average Joe, but
the average Joe is just
trying to ship their product.
But as I go from
shipping a product to shipping
products, plural, I realized that
I needed a visualization tool.
So, so end depend is
one of these tools. It
basically has, it has three
components. It's got a, a
console application that you run
against a project file and
it generates this massive XML
file that represents everything. It
knows about your system. It
basically chews up this stuff.
So you've got the console
app that chews up these
project files. You've got a
WinForms app that you basically
point at your solution and
it generates the super XML
file. Okay. And then you've
got a browser, which is
like a visual, It's all
very integrated. So literally I
opened it up. I pointed
at my solution file and
I say, generate the Product
file. The product generator basically
looks at my application and
says, these are framework components.
It came with the.net framework.
And these are components that
are in your application and
you can Mark a assemblies
as being part of the
framework or not. So if
you're using some third party
control and you want it
to be considered a framework
component, you can do that.
So it really knows the
difference between your app and
the other stuff underneath sometimes
apps. Aren't very smart about
that. Yeah. And then you
say run it shells out
to its console app and
does some voodoo that I
don't understand and then gives
you this XML file and
then launches this amazing browser.
And it's, it's ironic that
we're doing this via a
podcast because you really have
to see it. Sure. They've
got a lot of great
screencasts that'll show you kind
of live how this works.
You can take a look@shrinkstir.com
slash M one zero. And
that's a whole series of
screencast tutorials. I got to
give the guy credit for
making a crap load of
those. Basically it's got a
couple of different views that
are worth, that are worth
noting. So there's a, well,
gosh, there's so much to,
I'm trying to think where
to start. There's so much,
there's so much to talk
about. This is one of
the problems. I think that
the gentleman's going to have
marketing. This is that it's
so intense that you could
go, ah, screw it. Sorry.
Are you saying that there's
a newer version that is
less intense or is it
still very intense? I'm saying
that that programming is hard
and really visualizing effectively and
digging into the analysis of
your code involves some pretty
scary looking charts and graphs.
So have to know what
to do with that data.
Right. I mean, Exactly. And
that's kind of what we
want to talk about today,
so, okay. So independence allows
you to see the code
structure and it presents this
information as a, a software
dependency diagram. And these diagrams
look like, like maybe you've
played battleship, right? Sure. You've
got along one access, you
know, a bunch of numbers.
And along the other access,
a bunch of letters with
this, you've got all your
assemblies down, one access and
then those exact same assemblies
along the other axis. And
then there's a diagonal line
running through it. So then
you can point at any
dot on the grid. So
right now I'm going to
actually, And it shows dependencies
between them. Exactly, exactly right.
And depend. So right now
I am, I'm clicking on
one of those on my
application. I've taken my Karelian
platform. And I see here,
I click on that and
it has a number three
and it says in English,
it actually writes, generates an
English sentence. Three members of
the assembly execution services are
used by two methods of
the assembly pipeline. So now
I know my pipeline assembly
is two of the methods
of that assembly are using
three members from this other
one. So I get a
sense of the coupling and
I can flip to the
other and basically see the
inverse of that sentence, where
two methods of pipeline are
using three members of engine.
Then I can click on
that. And there are the
tools that'll do this. Like
there's a tool called latics
L a T T I
X it's a Java tool.
That's been poured over to.net,
but I'll talk about why
some of the visualization stuff
that independence doing is so
much more amazing. And this
was actually going to generate
a PNG file, a graphics
file with a, a, basically
like a UML type diagram
describing with arrows, which functions
are using which function. So
I can see dependencies between
these different assemblies. Got it.
This all sounds very cool
and makes nice charts and
stuff. But what do I,
I'm Joe I'm Joe developer.
Why do I mean, what
do I care? So there
are dependencies. What is, is
it bad to have dependencies?
Is it good? Is there
like a golden number that
I should achieve four chairs?
So one of the problems
I think happens with this
kind of a discussion with
these dependency major CS is
that they're not intuitive unless
you sit down and spend
five minutes, it's a lot
like PowerShell. That first five
minutes is just agonizing. And
then they start using math.
And whenever you see a,
a presentation or a PowerPoint
on this kind of stuff,
there's usually some, some kind
of equation, the right. And
unless you're a hardcore computer
science type, usually sample standard
deviation, screw it. I don't
want to be involved. It
brings back horrible flashbacks. Exactly.
Now for me, the problem
I was having was they
kept using terms like afferent,
coupling and efferent coupling. You
know, that's just about as
interesting as the difference between
the, the word effect and
effect, you know, it's like,
does it really do you
really care? And then I
realized I figured it out.
Okay. So to answer your
question, dependency management and really
understanding this stuff depends on
a couple of things. First,
there's the public face of
your application, right? What, what
methods, what types are being
exposed to the outside world?
That's one interesting thing, but
more interesting is who's using
them who cares. So there's
this notion of a stable
package or a stable, a
stable, and a package in
this case would be like
an assembly or an in
stable one. And that doesn't
necessarily not unstable, but it's
actually called in stable. This
doesn't mean that like, it's
good to be stable or
it's bad. These are just
descriptions of, of what it
means to be stable or
unstable. So a stable package
actually means that lots of
people depend on it. So
it's got a lot of
good reasons it shouldn't change.
So if I've got some
package that three people are
using three different assemblies are
dependent on mind assembly. That
means that it's got a
pretty good reason not to
change because I know I'm
going to break stuff, right.
And afferent AFF E R
E N T afferent coupling.
This is the number of
classes outside me that depend
on classes inside me. Okay.
While an efferent with an
E, this is the number
of classes inside me that
depend outside me. Sure. And
there's a really great PDF
that describes this with some
diagrams. And you can see
that@ashrinkstir.com slash M 12. And
this explains a very simple
kind of equation that comes
up with a number between
zero and one about how
stable or not a particular
thing is. So for example,
a very stable assembly. And
that means that it needs
to be stable, would have
a number of zero, a
stability metric of zero. That
means that lots of people
are using it, and it
really needs to not change.
Now, if you have a
lot of in stable things,
these are the, these would
be like leaf nodes, assemblies,
assemblies that you could change
them all day. Nobody cares
web pages, stuff like that.
Web pages that no one
refers to this tool can
look at these both direct
dependencies where this guy depends
on that guy. But also
the really interesting stuff is
the indirect dependencies where a
depends on B and B
depends on C. And if
you have a stable, if
you have a stable assembly,
one that really needs to
not be changing. And it's
got in stable ones on
both sides of it, you
can get into trouble. Basically.
You can get into dependency
chains where you change something
that seems harmless and then
realize that you've broken a
lot of your public users.
A lot of the developers
that are using you up
and downstream, Right? So it's
nice to have this thing
right there handy while you're
writing your code so that
you can see, you know,
how expensive is this going
to be? Unless you keep
it all in your head,
like you said, but you
don't scale. Exactly. You just,
you actually just, you just
nailed it. How expensive is
this going to be? Yeah.
So if you've got some
package, that's very kind of
volatile. That's difficult to that.
That that's difficult to change.
Then you're going to be
in, what's called the zone
of pain. This is, I
thought I was like, wow,
this sounds like a Hansel
ism. Doesn't it? It sounds
like Pat Hines, labyrinth of
pain, which is a thing
he just coined up one
day. This is actually a
real, a real thing. This
is not just me being,
being silly. I'm gonna just
bring up an independent report.
This is a report. And
this talks about the, this
is a graph that has
abstractness versus instability. So this
is a chart you've got
abstractness on the Y axis
going up and down. So
really abstract stuff, like things
that are very flexible. You
can derive from them. They're
not very concrete, right? They're
not marked sealed. Those have
have an axis. And on
the X axis are things
that are stable or unstable.
Like we've just talked about.
So there's this zone kind
of right down from the
upper left to the lower,
right? This nice green area.
And you want most of
your assemblies to fall in
that area. The zone of
would mean very stable assemblies.
That means assemblies. You don't
want to change that are
not very abstract. So this
means what about them? That
means that they're, they're rigid.
You can't change them, but
you also can extend them.
Yeah. Now the other side
of the zone of pain,
the opposite access is the
zone of uselessness. The zone
of uselessness are things that
are really abstract, but no
one's using them and have
no dependents. So they're really
useless. So I threw in
our application. Yeah, this is
deep stuff and I love
it, but you gotta, you
gotta take that five, 10
minutes and then you go,
Oh crap. So I dropped
my application in here and
I see my, my scatterplot.
And I can see now
that 90% of my stuff
is in this nice green
area, right there, the feed
zone, but sitting smack dab
in the zone of pain
as a, as a, an
assembly we have called wait
for it. Common, ah, ah,
we all have that common.
Yes, it's called system or
master or whatever. And this
is the dumping ground. So
this has actually identified something
I knew in my heart
of hearts was a problem
right now. I've actually got
hard metrics to describe why
it's a Hang and take
that to a meeting and
say, Hmm, something gotta be
done about this. Okay. So
it turns out that we
had been putting a number
of things in there, but
they're not extensible and a
lots and lots of people
rely on them. So now
I can go back over
to my, my, my matrix.
I can actually click on
that specific assembly. I'm going
to just click on it
right now. And then I
can choose to zoom in.
I can actually right click.
I'm going to say open
this dependency. It's going to
zoom in. And now I
can actually open the assembly
and look at each method.
So I just took one
number right now. The number
says, duh, 26, here we
go. 26 members are being
used by 15 other assemblies.
Okay. Can I zoom in
on that? And now I
can actually go and see
exactly which functions are being
used. And it'll Mark in
black, the parts that are
really sad and you know,
you're in trouble with, and
it turns out there was
one kind of structure that
was being used by the
entire planet, but that structure
really didn't have anything to
do with the rest of
that particular common assembly. So
that might mean an a
refactoring opportunity, Right? You take
that structure and put it
in its own assembly. Exactly.
Right. Scott, before we get
any further, is there any
way to look at multiple
projects at the same time,
because you might have dependencies
within one project or one
solution, but you could have
multiple solutions around a company
that, that use shared assemblies.
Absolutely. So it prefers to
have this particular application really
likes to have apps where
you have the source available,
because then you can actually
double click and it integrates
with visual studio such that
you can go into the
line of code that's that
they is, is causing problems,
but this will work on
projects or solutions as big
as you want. So I
just dumped our entire product
suite into it, and then
I can exclude or include
assemblies as I like. So
if you wanted to, you
could make one big solution
that doesn't exist for any
other purpose, except to contain
all the different projects that
you have at your company.
Exactly. So there's, there's a
tree map. It also has.
There was a note I
was saying before, when I
was kind of having trouble
expressing how much is going
on here and why it's
so scary. There's the matrix.
There's that software dependency matrix
that we've been talking about.
There's the, the zone of
pain zone of uselessness kind
of diagram. And then there
is a tree map. A
tree map is kind of
a tricky thing to, to
visualize. This is you may
have seen us in applications
that let you look at
your hard drive and see
how much space you're using
up like Sequoia view, where
the bigger file has a
bigger square, right? And you
basically get this giant diagram
filled with squares and you
have to, it takes a
second to go, wait a
second. What exactly do these
mean? Right. They've got a
very tricky tree map that
lets you see a square
is indicating methods. And you
could say, show me a
methods with lots of lines
of code and then the
bigger, the square, the bigger
the line of code. So
then you can hover over
them, just like you can.
When you're looking at these
applications that let you figure
out how much hard drive
you're taking up and you
can say, show me the
big fat functions, but there's
like 60 different metrics. You
can say, show me the
really complicated ones. Show me
the ones with a lot
of parameters. I was digging
around in this suite. I
found one function we had
that had 12 parameters, string
chemistry, and chemistry and chemistry
and chemistry and chemistry. This
can find that kind of
stuff. Now just like FX
cop. You have these rules
you can apply, but ethics,
copywriting rules and custom plugins
is a little trickier. The
number of people you'll find
using ethics cop is going
to be much higher than
the number of people who've
written custom FX cop plugins.
Sure. So this is the
part where I think this
guy is ready to blow
up this particular individual. And
I blow up for those
of you who aren't native
English speakers is a good
thing. This is a, I'm
saying that this scene explode
in the scene. Thank you.
This is a, a, a
secret product as far as
I'm concerned because people aren't
really exploiting it. So he's
actually written a spec for
something he calls CQL code
query language, and that's at
shrink stir slash M 11.
And you, you would love
this cause I know you're
a database guy. This is
sequel for assemblies. Hmm. Okay.
So he's got IntelliSense, which
is more than SQL server
had for a number of
years and you can go
and write. And this is,
I'm just reading a CQL
statement warn if count greater
than zero in select top
10 methods where psychosomatically complexity
is greater than 20. Wow.
Seriously. Wow. So you can
write this. Oh my God,
dude. I'm telling you check
this out, right? Count in
select top 10 methods where
number of lines of code
greater than whatever. Oh, here's
the part that's cool. As
you're typing this, he runs
the query in real time
and this is the best
part. The tree view. He
actually updates with hotspots like
a heat map, lighting up
those parts of the treatment
that are having the problem.
So I'm just running this
on my actual stuff here,
check this as this is
awesome. Look at this Warren,
if percentage greater than five
in methods where we're using
boxing. So then he actually
goes and says, you know,
here's a problem using boxing.
So here I go. And
I find a, an array
manipulation application where we're using
boxing 15 times in a
loop. Wow. I had no
idea. Wow, he's got design
constraints, naming constraints. And the
fun part is with the
professional version of this tool.
And I think it's about
he charges Euro, but I
think it's like 400 bucks,
but you'd really only need
one copy or a couple
maybe for the, for the
architect or the lead. You
wouldn't necessarily want to get
this for the entire company.
Sure. You can save these
queries and run them as
part of your build. Okay.
So you've got, I've got,
let me see this. Some
other one of these here.
We should have them as
an advertiser. I actually call
the guy. I should call
the guy he lives in
France, somewhere. A cyclometic here's
one. This was an actually
a composite one top 10
methods where percentages of comments
is less than 20 lines
of code greater than 10.
Wow. So then he'll go.
Here we go. And I
just found a function called
find item that has 16
lines of code and no
comments. And then here's the
part that's cool. It lights
it up in red on
the tree map. I'm going
to double click on that.
So I just double click
and now it's launched the
source code into visual studio
suite. You can integrate this.
Here's the part that is
going to blow you away.
He's he's he includes with
the product cruise control and
ms. Build tasks. So he'll
generate this report and just
tack it on the end
of your continuous integration, but
No kidding. So when you
check in code, it'll automatically
analyze it and spit you
back. Some report Got your
back and stuff. So this
is FX cop plus plus
plus, Oh my God. I
think it's a complimentary thing
to FX cup. Okay. And
here's the best thing Is
just basic detail. Yeah. Here's
the best fundamental stuff. So
this is the cool part.
He has an open source
version that's free. Hmm. The
difference between the professional edition
and the open source one
is that with the professional
one, these queries that you
can write these CQ ELLs,
you can save them, you
can make documents, you can
do constraint violations and all
that kind of stuff. You
can also do indirect dependencies.
Well, the trial one doesn't
have that feature, but the
trial version, you know, the
open source version includes all
the reporting. It includes creating
the projects with the, the,
the, the, that tool. It
includes some, you know, snapshot,
pictures of metrics and dependencies.
Hmm. So he really is
giving away a lot. He
probably should give away less
because he's doing so much,
but I I'm definitely personally
going to, I think I'm
gonna pick up a copy
of this. Maybe two for
a couple of my architects.
Here's the thing though. And
this is why I'm so
frustrated is that I try
to show it to some
guys here at work. And
it took about 10 minutes.
Now, once they got it,
they were like, Oh, we
have to have this. Well,
it took about 15 minutes
of you explaining what it
was all about before the
light clicked for me. But
then once you get it,
then you're like, wow, I
guess you could write these
queries on whatever kind of
code you are into writing.
Would it be data, you
know, database? It doesn't matter.
Whatever. So code that you've
generated that you want to
make sure is up to
a certain level of quality.
This is allowing me to
see at a larger view
what's going on in my
company, as far as, you
know, coupling this notion of
coupling has really been powerful
because just in the time
I've spent with this, I've
discovered two assemblies that I
am concerned are becoming too
too important. And I also
found some, some dependencies where
this is an interesting thing.
He can even analyze classes
within a single assembly. And
then look to see if
there's a dependency cycle. I
found two classes that are
basically dependent on each other,
right? Circular dependencies, not with,
not with, not without, I
was gonna say without not
outside the assembly, but just
inside. That tells me that
a, my design is probably
a little iffy. Yeah. That's
weird. Maybe these need to
be the same namespace. What
I think is tool lacks
is the kind of handholding,
you know, I would like
plain English and you should
do this. Well, he does
have the videos though, right?
The videos are really good.
These are the screencasts that
describe what's going on. He's
got at least a dozen
of them. I've only made
it through six or seven
myself. Cause there's a lot
of stuff up there. The,
the query language is pretty
intense, but again, you have
to know what you're going
to query for. He includes
60 different code metrics. So
you've got, you know, your
standard ones, lines of comments,
lines of code this afferent
and efferent coupling. Once I
figured out what that meant,
that was very useful. He's
got a bunch of comp
size stuff that I still
don't quite understand. Like here's
an example, lack of cohesion
of methods, Henderson, seller style
don't know what that means,
but all of these are
comp side things. So for
an academic person, this could
be really, really powerful right
now. The ones I'm focusing
on are things like variables,
fields, complexity, coupling at the
method level, stuff like that.
Wow. He's also got stuff
that's specific to fields versus
properties. So I found a
couple of places where we
were accessing something directly as
a field when we should
have had a property, stuff
like that. I have a
feeling that the bigger our
code gets, the, the better
this tool is going to
perform for us is right
now, I've got a five
15, 20, 25 Karelian specific
DLLs for the project that
I'm looking at 10 Kirlian
framework DLLs. I'm also using
the I'm using this tool
on the Microsoft best practices
library. Cause I use the
enterprise library for the best
practices. And then I've also
included all of the.net framework
underneath it. And this really
gives you an idea of
what you're leaning on. Like
I'm just by looking at
this, I can see that
we're using system dot XML,
58 different members within our,
one of our applications. I
can see how heavily am
actually. One thing that's helped
me with yesterday was figuring
out if I were to
remove a component and put
in a third party component,
how much trouble is it
going to be? Yeah. What
would the impact be? Cause
see, this is the thing
you've got lots of refactoring
tools out there. That'll tell
you, I can fix this
problem, but you got to
know the problem. This tool
will tell you all the
problems, but of course it
won't fix them. So somebody
needs to get this guy
together with Mark Miller, right. To
make a tool that actually
not only tells you what's
wrong, but how to fix
it. Wow. Amazing Scott. Yeah.
I really think that in
Microsoft's doing this kind of
stuff internally, you know, they've
got so many people talking
about static analysis, they talked
about it at PDC in
tech ed last year. There's
so much that can be
done. We're just touching, just
touching the surface. Other tools
that are like this of
course are latics L a
T T I X originally
a Java tool. There's a.net
version as well. And they
might be considered a competitor
to this guy, but I'm
just enamored with this particular
one because I guess it's
one French guy, his name
and what is his name?
Patrick . He wrote a
book on dotnet to his,
his pricing is pretty reasonable.
It looks like he says
zero to 99. So I
guess that's $400 for an
arrest. But if you buy
like four licenses, it goes
down to 300 bucks and
what's the shrinks or to
his website again. So his
website is at  dot
com slash Moz, but it's
easier to get to it
just at  dot com.
Oh, okay. Very easy. Alright,
great. Yeah, Scott, that's awesome.
Maybe we should do a
DNR TV on it. So
that's a really great idea
because the more I learn
about how this works, even
though he's got a lot
of scraped screencast, maybe I
can do one where I
can maybe look at DAS
blog and actually fix the
problem. That'd be great while
we do it. How cool
would that be? Alright, thanks
Scott. And we'll see you
next week on handsome man.
.